 
English Name: Shanghai
Chinese Name: ?? (shàng hai)
Administration Type: Municipality
Area: 7,037 sq km (2,717 sq mi)
Resident Population: 23,019,148
Area Code & Zip Code: 
Area Code: 021; 
Postal Code: 200000 - 202100

 Geography: Yangtze River Delta, Southeast China (31° 14' N, 121° 29' E)
 City Layout: Administrative Divisions, Area Distribution
 History
 Economy
 Events: Festivals, Performances, Competitions, Exhibitions, Conventions, Expo 2010
 Airports: Pudong International Airport; Hongqiao International Airport
 Railway Stations: Shanghai Railway Station, South Railway Station, Hongqiao Railway Station

Fifty years ago Shanghai was an island of floodlit art deco cinemas, modern skyscrapers and electric trams, marooned in the midst of a China that had hardly changed in a thousand years. As the city petered out on the road to Nanjing, the neon signs and the street lights disappeared into the darkness of a medieval night. To drive across the city in those days, you needed three different driving licenses to negotiate your way from the Chung Hwa Road to what was then called the Boulevard des Deux Republiques, to Edward VII Avenue and Broadway. You could have worshipped in your choice of onion domed Russian Orthodox churches, the product of the army of White Russian refugees who sailed out of Vladivostock with the Bolsheviks at their heels. It’s a history that suggests a city shaped by a mix of pragmatism, opportunism and anarchy. Shanghai was China’s window on the world, its most industrially advanced and commercially sophisticated city. And it still is, even as Beijing is working hard to re-establish pre-eminence with a building programme in the capital that is just as frenetic as Shanghai’s. Shanghai’s decision to hold an Expo in 2010 is its own response to the 2008 Olympics in Beijing.
There is a tendency among western observers to look at China’s two great cities, Shanghai and Beijing, as vast urban agglomerations that have broken the bounds of size and scale and so isolate themselves from conventional urban precedents. But in terms of population size, Shanghai, with around 20 million people is a city of the same order of magnitude as New York, and London, both metropolises with a population of around 18 million. The most striking differences between Shanghai, London and New York are political organisation and urban culture. Shanghai is effectively a city state, with the powers of the central government at its disposal to annex satellite towns and villages and to open up territory into its direct control. We know Shanghai is big because there is no obfuscation about the difference between the city in the political sense, and in wider definitions of it as an entity. But, as much as we are ready to analyse London or New York as urban regions, the perception is still shaped by political boundaries.
Shanghai, where one in five of its population is made up of temporary in-migrants from predominantly rural China, is the key city setting the pattern for the explosive urban growth in Asia. It is as much a phenomenon of our times as the equally rapid and – to its contemporaries – equally disturbing transformation of Western industrial cities of the early 19th century. It is a phenomenon which is producing a sense of strangeness and dislocation, this time bound up with the overwhelming impact of speed. When the British happened on the Chinese walled settlement of Shanghai towards the end of the Opium War and fought for their right to sell the opium that they cultivated in India to the citizens of the Chinese empire, there was nothing on what is now the Pudong side of the Huang Po River. British traders, attracted by the river traffic on the Yangtze river and its many tributaries linking inland China and the trade routes from Europe, America and later Japan, persuaded their government to insist on their unhindered access to Shanghai’s port.
Fossilised through the Mao years, the Bund still looks like a hallucinogenic transplant of a European city to Asia. But Shanghai was never a traditional colony. The city was run, by a series of different, but parallel administrations. It was an arrangement that allowed a hybrid culture to flourish in the cracks between regimes. In large parts of the city, it was never entirely clear exactly who was responsible for enforcing any kind of legal system.
The long freeze on Shanghai’s development only lifted at the end of the 1980s,with the introduction of the market economy to China. In terms of physical development and planning, this triggered a great deal of research into appropriate models for Shanghai. Of course Hong Kong, with its carefully managed state land bank and the government’s use of auctions to fundraise and control development, was studied with care. But so was the experience of Barcelona as it emerged from its transformation for the Olympics of 1992. Before the wave of new building really took hold, Shanghai staged an architectural competition for a redevelopment strategy to deal with the whole Pudong area. It showed both the strengths and weaknesses of Shanghai’s position. Many of the world’s leading architects – Toyo Ito, Massimiliano Fuksas and Richard Rogers among them – were invited to take part. They all put forward more or less radical attempts at masterplanning, all of them mutually exclusive in their approach to land-use and form. The city claims to have adopted the best features of all the competitors, and the development of a new business district in Pudong has proceeded at breakneck speed, although along lines that bear little resemblance to anything that emerged in the competition.
Shanghai has moved beyond the first rush of crude tower building, and the mood has changed. In central Shanghai, the American architects led by John Portman who were responsible for many of the early high rises, have given way to a wider selection of designers, who are beginning to demonstrate a more considered range of approaches. As demonstrated by the property investment in the Bund, and in some of the surviving fragments of 19th century Shanghai, the city is also beginning to develop a more nuanced attitude to its own past. Under the Pearl television tower you find the Mayor’s call to his citizens to “Rejoice in the present, while recalling the past” carved in both Chinese and English into a low granite wall. Shanghai is determined that every visitor knows all about what is going on now, and expresses this in language that seems to recall the days of the Red Guards. “Persist in the development of Pudong without wavering until it is done” reads one giant billboard. The city is busy planting trees and even the flyovers are fringed with planting boxes dangling green over the side of the road. It has installed its famous $700 million Maglev train system to make the 40 km trip to Pudong airport at an awesome 400 km per hour. And it is metamorphosing with such speed that it dynamited the central railway station built as recently as 1988. The city had already outgrown it.
At the regional level, Shanghai is developing a policy for its position at the centre of the Yangtze delta. On a national level, it is competing with Hong Kong and Tokyo. It is moving beyond manufacturing to advanced service industries, as much a part of the rhetorical agenda for every ambitious city as culture-led renewal. The question facing Shanghai is if its best model is New York, London or Tokyo, or perhaps California, as it attempts to create a balance between its suburban industrial estates, and its high rise city centre. It is still working to reduce cycling by another 25 per cent in the next five years, just as it is working to reduce population densities in the inner city where there are still particularly crowded areas such as the Old West Gate, with people living at 760 to the hectare.
Getting to grips with a city that has been undergoing double digit economic growth for more than a decade demands a set of conceptual tools rather different to the conventional repertoire employed by those who spend their time thinking about urban issues. The inescapable fact is speed. Shanghai is a city whose development over the last ten years has by any standards been extraordinarily rapid.
The story of Shanghai’s speed and friction can be told in summary. Since 1990, living space per person has doubled to reach 15 square metres per resident. In the same period, the city has built 40% more roads. There are approaching two million cars. The metro system has reached a daily capacity of 1.4 million people, and is intended to reach five times that figure. The city has developed an entirely new business district in Pudong in less than two decades and it has embarked on the construction of a ring of satellite towns – designed in German, Italian, Scandinavian and Chinese urban styles. In the rush to build office towers to catch a perceived market, speed has been the determinant of form. Rather than give architects and engineers the time to produce considered technical solutions to optimise net to gross ratios, developers have demanded instant starts. Without time to make sophisticated calculations, engineers have over-specified structural cores. Buildings less than ten years old have aged with remarkable rapidity. Some have become redundant even before they are finished.
In Shanghai, friction comes with speed. It’s the kind of friction that comes as development accelerates, and decelerates, the friction that fills the gap between the imperatives of what is still operating within the framework of a Marxist control and command economy, the actual results, and often unintended consequences. This provides an echo of the gaps between the administrations that ran the old Shanghai. You can see the will to centralise in the language of Shanghai’s plans. Not just in the huge signboard that exhorts its citizens to “Persist without wavering until it is done”, but even more in what the city calls “the six pillars”, not a Maoist call to arms, but a policy to build a strong economy based on cars, semiconductors, petrochemicals, trade, finance, real estate and construction.
After New York, Shanghai is the second in the Urban Age investigations on cities. It provides a chance to learn from a city in the midst of a spasm of change so violent that it questions the extent of human resilience, to explore the meaning of speed and friction. It is a city which is moving so fast that it’s possible to see the impact of theory on practice like nowhere else in the world.


As the largest city in China and an economic, commercial and financial center, Shanghai is vital to the country's future. No other city in the country is more vibrant and fascinating or has such a unique colonial past.

Shanghai, literally 'Above the Sea', is a port city on the Huangpu River, where the Yangtze River empties into the East China Sea. Originally a fishing and textiles town, the city gained its identity after it was opened to foreign powers by the 1842 Treaty of Nanking. The British, French, Americans, Germans, and Russians moved in, setting up their distinct Western-style banks, trading houses, and mansions, leaving a permanent architectural legacy. The city flourished as a cosmopolitan and thriving commercial and financial center, dubbed the "Pairs of the East" in 1920s and 1930s. In spite of being the cradle of Chinese Communism, the city was neglected during the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s and 1970s. In 1990, it was chosen to spearhead modern China's reform and opening up, which resulted in intense development. In addition, the city has often been the inspiration for novels, films and cocktails. It is probably the most evocative city for an outsider to visit all of the country. Beijing may be more mysterious, but Shanghai offers half-understood, semi-mythical images.?


Shanghai is always a fun to visit. The commerce river -  Huangpu River, a tributary of the Yangtze River, is lined up with a gallery of different architectures, known as the Bund, beckoning to curious visitors and smart locals alike. Although erected during different periods in varying styles such as Gothic, Romanesque or Baroque, those fifty-two buildings stand together in perfect harmony. When night falls, the two most famous - Bank of China Building and the Peace Hotel - are bathed in lavender lighting, and are the most telling witness to the past century of the Bund. Mansions, garden estates, clubs and cathedrals built by Westerners a century ago are scattered throughout the city. There is even a synagogue, built during the days of an unprecedented Jewish immigration here. Traditional treasures, though not so many as in Beijing, turns up on a walk through the chaotic old city: a teahouse, active temples, ancient pagodas and  quintessential southern-Chinese classic gardens such as the Yuyuan Garden. Across the Huangpu River from the original settlement of Puxi is the city's future, the Pudong New Area. Its modern and ever-expanding skyline includes the emblematic Orient Pearl Tower, the highest observation decks in Asia, the soaring modern art-deco Jin Mao Tower and the 101-floor World Financial Centre featuring the Park Hyatt hotel, the tallest hotel in the world.

In 2004, it hosted the inaugural A1GP World Cup of Motorsport and later that year Time magazine called Shanghai the 'world's most happening city.' In October 2007 the city hosted the first Special Olympic Games ever held in Asia. The city's centre-stage status continues, in 2010, when it hosts World Expo.
Easily China's richest city and the leading trendsetter in fashion, design and the arts, Shanghai is the best city in the country for dining and shopping. Locals of the city, considered frank, efficient, and progressive, are creating the country's most outward-looking, and modern metropolis, replete with legions of futuristic skyscrapers, glitzy restaurants, bars, hotels, brand awareness and shopping savvy, competing with rival Asia cities such as Hong Kong, and Singapore.


Shanghai (shang´hi´, shäng´hi´), city and municipality (2010 pop. 23,019,148), in, but independent of, Jiangsu prov., E China, on the Huangpu (Whangpoo) River where it flows into the Chang (Yangtze) estuary. It is an independent unit (2,400 sq mi/6,218 sq km) administered directly by the central government. One of the world's great seaports, Shanghai is China's largest city. 

Economy

The only large port of central China not cut off from the interior by mountains, it is the natural seaward outlet of, and the gateway to, the Chang basin, one of China's richest regions. It handles much of the country's foreign shipping and a large coastal trade. Great sums are expended to keep open its continually silting harbor. A submarine base is in the harbor. A new deepwater port, Yangshan, located on islands 17 mi (27.5 km) SE of Shanghai in the South China Sea, opened in 2005; the port is connected to the mainland by the 20.2-mi (32.5-km) Donghai Bridge. Although water transport is of prime importance, highways radiate outward, and there are rail connections with Nanjing and Hangzhou, with links through those cities to the N and S China networks. A new international airport opened in Pudong (East Shanghai) in 1999.

Despite a lack of fuel and raw materials, Shanghai is China's leading industrial city, with large steelworks; textile mills; shipbuilding yards; oil-refining, gas-extracting, and diamond-processing operations; and plants making light and heavy machinery, electrical, electronic, and computer equipment, machine tools, turbines, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, aircraft, tractors, motor vehicles, plastics, and consumer goods. The city also is a major financial and publishing center and a regional headquarters for many multinational companies, and contains a free-trade zone (est. 2013). Shanghai includes much of the surrounding rural area (over 2,000 sq mi/5,000 sq km); there farms produce the food crops that support the city's population.

In the 1970s and 80s, Shanghai's industrial base was shifted to include more light industries in order to reduce pollution. There was much rebuilding and expansion; new factories emerged around the outskirts of the city, and the northwest section was developed as an industrial district. Development in the 1990s concentrated on Pudong, an area formerly dominated by farms and marshland that was designated a special economic development zone. A project to divert much-needed water for the city from the Chang River into the Huangpu was completed in 1996. The 1990s also brought new bridges and tunnels and a subway system, now the world's longest. 

Landmarks and Institutions

The city's commercial section, the former International Settlement, is modern and Western in appearance, with broad streets and boulevards lined with imposing buildings. The Bund (which runs along the waterfront), Nanjing Road, and Bubbling Well Road are the most noted thoroughfares. Typical Asian buildings are found only in the original Chinese town (no longer walled), known as Nanshi. The Oriental Pearl Television Tower (1,535 ft/468 m high), three neighboring, soaring skyscrapers—the Shanghai Tower, the Shanghai World Financial Center, and the Jin Mao Tower—and the butterfly-orchid-shaped Oriental Arts Center with its four performance halls are in Pudong.

Next to Beijing, Shanghai is the country's foremost educational center and is home to Fudan Univ., Jiaotong Univ., Shanghai Univ. of Science and Technology, Tongji Univ., three medical colleges, and numerous technological and scientific institutes. Shanghai has an astronomical observatory and many research institutes and learned societies. People's Square, refurbished in the late 1990s, is the site of an opera house and a museum containing the country's finest collection of Chinese art. The Shanghai Contemporary Art Museum, in a converted 19th-century power plant, was the first government-supported museum of its kind in China. The China Art Museum houses a large collection of Chinese modern art. Several private museums, notably the Minsheng and the Rockbund Art Museums, also show new art. 

History

The name Shanghai dates from the Sung dynasty (11th cent.), but the town, which became a walled city in the 16th cent., was unimportant until it was opened to foreign trade by the Treaty of Nanjing in 1842. The ensuing Western influence launched the city on its phenomenal growth. The greater part of the city was incorporated into the British concession (1843), just north of the old walled city, and into the U.S. concession of Hongkew (1862). In 1863 the United States and Great Britain consolidated into the International Settlement the areas that had been conceded to them. The French, who had obtained a concession in 1849, continued it as a separate entity. The foreign zones, which were under extraterritorial administration, maintained their own courts, police system, and armed forces. Thus Shanghai until World War II was a divided city.

In 1927, Chiang Kai-shek, at the head of the Nationalist army and with the support of the Chinese Communists, captured Shanghai. The Chinese section was immediately placed under the Kuomintang government. Japan invaded and attacked the Chinese city in 1932 to force the government to break an unofficial boycott of Japanese goods. In Aug., 1937, as part of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Japanese again attacked the Chinese city, and resistance was overcome in November. The foreign zones were occupied by the Japanese after Dec. 7, 1941.

In 1943 the United States and Great Britain renounced their claims in Shanghai, as did France in 1946. The city was restored to China at the end of World War II, and the Chinese central government for the first time gained control of the entire city. In May, 1949, it fell to the Communist forces. Since Pudong was declared (1990) a special development zone, government and foreign investment has revived Shanghai as an international trade and financial center. A
